An occasion of choice, action, selection, or interaction is an event of communication.  The micrometaphysical utility of communication is a contribution to memory or spirit, while the quality of communication is a micrometaphysical effect of micrometaphysical consciousness.  


Our awareness of our past shows us that macrometaphysical health circumscribes the boundaries of micrometaphysical health as macrometaphysical wealth.  Our economic development on the scale illustrated by the arrival of leisure demonstrates the implicit development of macrometaphysical wealth.  The intolerance of murder reflects the arrival of leisure and the establishment of general social awareness.  The development of the awareness of consciousness, the epistemology micrometaphysics and its relationships with macrometaphysics, brings social awareness into the general understanding of society’s varied aspects and dimensions.


The context of language imports the perspective of situation and being, study and seeming.  Across the breadths and depths of society, coherent perspective preserves experience and learning as one shares with friends and family.  The range of unadulterated perspective is as broad and deep as the aspects and dimensions of our membership.  The awareness of our membership permits the identification and characterization of manipulation, exploitation, and other forms of pollution that fail the test of fairness of occasion known to the presence of the breath of life.


The fairness test is a strong indicator of utility.  When appearance matches fairness, we expect that the occasion is sincere.  When the occasion is insincere, we recognize manipulation, exploitation, or pollution.  We do this intuitively, but fail to perform the test of person in the case of the macrometaphysical discord found in media such as television.  We are familiar with the complexities of fiction and have become complacent with the complexities of entertainment and politics.  Recognizing these errors as self destructive delivers us from our disease with some of our macrometaphysical states.