The fundamental macrometaphysical wealth is in the health of each individual human being, in the practice of self awareness, and the recognition of the primacy of the individual choice in the disposal of this breath of life.  The principles of ethics and human rights attempt to circumscribe and detail that which will come to be known as the epistemology of metaphysics, the health of being that is metaphysical wealth.


Unfortunately, we have adapted to macrometaphysical pollution with defences that have betrayed and injured ourselves.  Recognizing these errors is essential to our development of metaphysical health.  


The tools of recognition are the classical identification and characterization of metaphysical obstruction.  The micrometaphysical consciousness has a component that performs this operation.  


κ = α + β + γ + δ + σ


The consciousness has five component centers in which one lives.  The inner consciousness, α, demands peace and dignity from the state of the outer consciousness as β + γ + δ + σ.  The macrometaphysical world of others in the largest sense, in society, is abstracted into the esoterica of consciousness, σ.  The intellect of friends and family and knowledge and senses is the most familiar conception of consciousness, β.  The social consciousness, γ, is a psychophysiological feature known for paranoia.  The sexual consciousness, δ, is best known as a gateway to trust and confidence as most familiar to the child bearing partnership.  The psychophysiological centers of consciousness are components of a system that includes psychophysiological musculature for the exercise of each facility in a healthy faculty.


The best known example of psychophysiological musculature is the mind’s eye.  The mind’s eye is an aperture from α into β that opens and closes like an ocular iris.  Familiarity with the inner consciousness begins with the recognition of the state of the inner consciousness.  It is the font of emotion.  Emotion is the primary expressive force, the least subtle force from the inner consciousness.  The term force of life fairly identifies the character of the inner consciousness.  The feelings within express the state of the inner consciousness.  Emotions express the perception of the state of the outer consciousness.  


If I am injured and cry of it, the inner consciousness has seen the experience known to the outer consciousness and expresses the frustration and harm to the mind-body unity.  This facility is the central feature of humanity.  It is our ultimate source of interpretation of meaning.  The meaning of the word hunger depends on α + β to recognize and identify and remember the meaning of the word hunger in the sensory β and spiritual or emotional α.


Likewise, in all things, the interpretation of communication is important.  The fundamental preservation of humanity requires the conservation of the individual micrometaphysical epistemology.  We know utility and fairness and justice as we know the meaning of words.  The individual role in society is the conservation of humanity as the primacy of micrometaphysical epistemology.  


The recognition of exploitation and manipulation and aberration as insincere and not well founded on individual situation and expression in person or society is important.  It is the meaning that defends humanity from its inhumanity, and our metaphysical wealth from the deficits of our self destruction.