World Perspectives vol 27

Alfred North Whitehead: His Reflections on Man and Nature
Ruth Nanda Anshen, 1961, Harper and Brothers, NY, NY

Chap 1, Nature and Life

p10, problem statement (level of abstraction definition) "the status
     of life in nature", critique of positivism as a formulaic field
     of literature marching in succession

p11, positivistic myopia, lack of academic creativity, surplus of
     consistency, doctrine of simplicity, nature is no more than the
     union of mechanical routines described or to be described by
     science.  Descartes' separation of material substance and mental
     substance poisoned all subsequent philosophy.  

p12, ANW fusion doctrine "really real" things include physical nature
     and life, conception of life fused with nature, (eco life)
     "self-enjoyment" (smells like eco utility), derives "a certain
     immediate individuality" from this (utility), appropriation to
     self-enjoyment as prehension, immediate self enjoyment as
     occasion of experience, collective unity -- evolving universe --
     creative advance, (fixed level of abstraction is stable element
     of thought)

p13, occasion -- creativity -- intelligence, potential -- occasion --
     realization -- creativity, creativity -- realization --
     self-enjoyment, function of life in occasion of experience as
     fusion of potential with self-enjoyment, doctrine of creative
     advance

p14, aim as reduction of objective possibility space to inclusion
     within scope of actualization or realization, aim yields
     self-enjoyment (missing abstraction, imagining, projection, per
     se?).  "aim involves the entertainment of the ideal" "so as to be
     directive of the creative process", (emphasizing [enjoyment] as
     an attribute of process not result, ob in re [function]),
     (therefore sublimating a metaphysical analysis), senses
     irrelevant to the body [sight] and partly referent to the body
     [pain~]

p15, sight -- external presentation for entertainment or anxiety,
     sensory modes with prominent and recessive relevance to (mind and
     body), "information derived from sense-perception", "doctrines
     derived from Hume defective by reason of their neglect of bodily
     reference"

p16, that the laws of nature lack inherent necessity relates to the
     cause of elucidation of a logical metaphysics (existentialism) as
     the conscience of instrument that envelops the evolution of
     physics (natural science)

p17, the conscience of physics has been the doctrine of practical
     utility independent of a metaphysical conscience that would enable its
     own evolution

p18, independence of reason from instrument in doctrine of science,
     effective method with undefined philosophical underpinnings, (all
     is subjective with respect to the observer) [1] "division between
     mentality and nature has no ground in our fundamental
     observation", "we find ourselves living within nature", [2] "I
     conclude that we should conceive mental operations as among the
     factors which make up the constitution of nature" [3] "we should
     reject the notion of idle wheels in the process of nature",
     "every factor which emerges makes a difference, and that
     difference can only be expressed in terms of the individual
     character of that factor", [4] "have now the task of defining
     natural factors so as to understand how mental occurances are
     operative in conditioning the subsequence course of nature"

p19, (entering existentialism with corporal reference of scale to
     nature as arbitrary and independent of scientific method, thereby
     retrieving the object of being), "[scientific] classification
     hides the truth (of!) that the different modes of natural
     existence shade off into each other, "span of existence is
     relative to our habits of human life", ((existential mechanics
     have limit at the scale of aggregation familiar to language))

p20, "each scale of observation presents us with [average? (hyper
     observational)] effects proper to that scale", "evident
     possession of sight", "[information~] derived from sight",
     "nothing intrinsic to [the information derived from sight] which
     provides any hint of [internal~] activity whereby change can be
     understood", "It is from this experience that our conception of a
     spatial distribution of passive material substances arises.
     Nature is thus described as made up of vacuous bits of matter
     with no internal values, and merely hurrying through space."

p21, [1] "in the visual experience we are aware of the intervention of
     the body [in the metaphysical experience]", "We know [directly]
     that we see with our eyes.  That is a vague feeling[, but
     [extremely~?] important]", [2] "every type of crucial experiment
     proves that what we see, and where we see it, depends entirely
     upon the physiological functioning of our body", [the body is
     mechanically deterministic], "The body is supremely indifferent
     to the happenings of nature a short way off, where it places its
     visual sensa.", "all sense-perception is merely one outcome of
     the dependence of our experience upon bodily functionings", "to
     understand the relation of our personal experience to the
     activities of nature, the proper procedure is to examine the
     dependence of our personal experience upon our personal bodies",
     "our overwhelming persuasions as to our own personal body-mind
     relation", [1] "the claim to unity.  The human individual is one
     fact, body and mind.", [2] "the functioning of the body has a
     wider influence than the production of sense-experience",
     (dependence of hierarchy of needs on consciousness and
     abstraction)

p22, "For example, you can [enjoy] the ease with which your eyes are
     functioning even when you are looking at a bad picture or a
     vulgar building.  This direct feeling of the derivation emotion
     from the body is among our fundamental experiences.", "For
     philosophy, the one fundamental fact is that the whole complexity
     of mental experience is either derived or modified by such
     functioning.  Also, our basic feeling is this sense of
     derivation, which leads to our claim for unity, body and mind.",
     "But our immediate experience also claims derivation from another
     source, and equally claims a unity founded upon this alternative
     source of derivation.  This second source is our own state of
     mind directly preceding the immediate present of our conscious
     experience.", "state of mind", (linear temporaneity of state of
     mind), (continuity) "half the truth", ([identity] of self and
     mind), "it was our very identical self in that state of mind,
     which is, of course, the basis of our present experience a
     quarter of a second later.  In another sense the the word
     "continuing" overstates.  For we do not quite continue in our
     preceding state of experience.  New elements have intervened.
     All of these new elements are provided by our bodily
     functionings.  We fuse these new elements with the basic stuff of
     experience provided by our state of mind a quarter of a second
     ago."

p23, "we claim an identification with the body", (wandering over
     territory), "submit that we have here the fundamental basic
     persuasion on which we found the whole practice of our
     experience.", "While we exist, body and soul are inescapable
     elements in our being, each with the full reality of our own
     immediate self."  "there is a unity of the body with the
     environment, as well as a unity of body and soul into one
     person."

p24, "curious variation in the vividness of the successive occasions
     of the soul's existence", "we sleep with a total lapse of the
     stream of consciousness", "These functionings of the soul are
     diverse, variable, and discontinuous.  The claim to the unity of
     the soul is analogous to the claim to the unity of body and soul,
     and is analogous to the claim to the community of the body with
     an external nature.  It is the task of philosophic speculation to
     conceive the happenings of the universe so as to render
     understandable the outlook of physical science and to combine the
     outlook with these direct persuasions representing the basic
     facts upon which epistemology must build.  The weakness of the
     epistemology of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was that
     it based itself purely upon a narrow formulation of
     sense-perception.  The result was to exlude all the really
     fundamental factors constituting our experience.",

p25, "In such an epistemology we are far from the complex data which
     philosophic speculation has to account for in a system rendering
     the whole understandable.", 

p26, "We have to construe the world in terms of the general
     functionings of the world.", "some doctrine of mutual immanence"
     (significance, invariance)

p27, "The only intelligible doctrine of causation is founded on the
     doctrine of immanence.", "each occasion presupposes the
     antecedent world as active in its own nature.  This is the reason
     why events have a determinate status relatively to each
     another.", "This is the doctrine of causation.", (continuity),
     "twofold unity", "We are in the world and the world is in us.
     Our immediate occasion is in the society of occasions forming the
     soul, and our soul is in our present occasion.", "This fact of
     observation, vague but imperative, is the foundation of the
     connexity of the world, and of the transmission of its types of
     order."

p28, temporal processes classified [environment > causation],
     [immediacy enjoyment > creation], [conceptual anticipation >
     technological aim of ideal], 

p30, "The lowest stages of effective mentality, controlled by the
     inheritance of physical pattern, involve the faint direction of
     emphasis by unconscious ideal aim."

p31, "elements in our experience in terms of which [a systematic
     metaphysical cosmology] should be constructed.  The key notion,
     from which such construction should start, is that the energetic
     activity considered in physics is the emotional intensity
     entertained in life."
